---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Researching Photography
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 86
wordpress_url: /articles/2006/11/22/researching-photography/
date: '2006-11-22 11:57:56 -0500'
date_gmt: '2006-11-22 16:57:56 -0500'
categories:
- Articles
tags: []
comments: []
---
Welcome to the **New and Improved** Single-Serving Photo! This is my
first real article post since I rolled out this whole new design, and
I'm really happy to welcome you all who may be reading it!

Lately, I've been reading an awful lot on the subject of photography,
both in "dead tree" format as well as digital. I want to take this
opportunity as I welcome everyone to what I hope will grow to be yet
another useful resource in the field to call out to some of the people,
sites, and other sources that have kept me going and inspired me during
the transition.

The first source of great photographic information that I want to
recommend is ShutterBug magazine. They review new equipment, talk about
workflow issues, software, techniques, locations, and everything else
you'd want to learn about as an aspiring photographer as well as a
professional. What sets ShutterBug apart from its peers on the
photography newsstand (e.g. Popular Photography) is the matter-of-fact,
somewhat gritty, down-to-Earth writing you will find in it. Every
article, with few exceptions, is written by a real, dyed in the wool,
professional photographer. That is to say, someone who makes their
living making pictures. I find that the articles are sometimes lacking
in "spit and polish" when it comes to the raw grammar and sentence
structure, but that is because these people are not writers, they are
photographers.

It's somewhat endearing and confidence-inspiring to be reading the
actual words of someone who has hands-on experience with the subject at
hand, and whose words haven't been mingled around in an editor's
overzealous grammar checker. The other perk of reading so many different
opinions and thoughts is just that; a variety of viewpoints. You can
find articles written by very pedantic, purist photogs who couldn't bear
to ever use off-brand equipment, as well as reviews written by Average
Joe Photog making a few sacrifices here and there to save a buck or two.
Both are valuable opinions to anyone interested in the field.

*Bottom line: ShutterBug delivers interesting and useful content each
month for the reasonable price of about \$2 an issue, plus you always
seem to get about 14 of the latest B&H and Adorama catalogs somewhere in
the middle. Call it a bonus, if you want.*

Getting into the digital world, there are a few sites that I find
*consistently* useful and interesting information on, and those are
[Strobist](http://strobist.blogspot.com), [Rob Galbraith
DPI](http://www.robgalbraith.com), [Still Life
With](http://www.stilllifewith.com), and [DIY Photography
(Photocritic)](http://www.photocritic.org). Go ahead and click those
links and get addicted, if you wish, or read on to hear why I think
they're worth your time.

**Strobist** follows the experiences and advice of a journalism
photographer by the name of David who wishes to share the joy of
low-cost, portable flash use with everyone. Aside from being an
accomplished photographer, he is also good at explaining things
fluently, which is an important skill for any blogger to have, and
especially important for a blogger concerned with such technical topics
as light metering (that wasn't a jab; I mean that). You will always find
great information, inspiration, and links to other interesting resources
on Strobist, which is why I read it and I think you should, too.

**Rob Galbraith DPI** (Digital Photography Insights, not Dots Per Inch)
is a blog I just started reading very recently. Rob is a Canadian
photojournalist based out of Calgary who brings information about
photography technique as well as equipment and software to the fore on
his "Digital Photography Insights" page. With the support of co-editor
Mike Sturk and staff writer Eamon Hickey, DPI has no trouble presenting
new and exciting content continuously.

**Still Life With**, as you have already guessed, is concerned primarily
with photographing things on tables that don't move. Specifically, we're
talking about food. Now, for those of you who have any experience in
photographing still lives or doing any tabletop product photography, you
know how difficult it can be. Still Life With takes it to the next level
with techniques and advice for making your tabletop still lives look
both crisp and inviting as well as *completely delicious*. This is a
blog you can definitely dig into (pun intended) as an amateur, and
doesn't expect you to break your bank account with tons of high-end,
flashy equipment (pun also intended). It will also (probably) make you
hungry. Don't read this one on an empty stomach.

**DIY Photography (Photocritic)** is the blog of <span
class="entry-author-name">Haje Jan Kamps, a Dutch photography freelancer
</span>in the publishing business who has proven himself capable of
populating his site with a continuous stream of new content. There you
will find photography-related news, reviews, tutorials, advice, and
more; it's basically a catch-all of content, and I have found it to be a
dependable source. Photocritic may not be the best resource for the
glamorous professional, but if you are a glamorous professional
photographer and you are reading *this* blog, please let me know!
