---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Creative Commons: Good Idea?'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 129
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/06/25/creative-commons-good-idea/
date: '2007-06-25 11:09:45 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-06-25 15:09:45 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- copyright
- law
- research
- editorial
- business
- licensing
---

Is it a good idea to give away work for self-promotion? Can you realize
secondary gains from charity? I like to think of myself as a charitable person;
my stance has typically been to give things away in the name of recognition
rather than lock them up and hope to find a market for them in the future. I'd
rather let the world see my work and appreciate it than stand on principle and
be completely unrecognized.

That said, everyone has a different threshold of charity, and that threshold
seems to be linked to their success and recognition.  Completely unrecognized
people give things away to gain exposure. After achieving success, they often
stop giving things away to maximize their gains. Then, if they become very
successful, they may begin giving things away again because they can afford to.

Because there are so many nuances to the ways in which creators may wish for
their work to be used by others, the Creative Commons emerged, creating whole
new gradations within the copyright system. Now, rather than saying "all rights
reserved," we can easily say "some rights reserved" and call upon a pile of
pre-written legalese. Good idea?~~MORE~~

## Understanding Copyright

Fundamentally, copyright is an agreement among the people to treat creative
works in specific ways. Historically, copyright established a monopoly over a
creative work that its creator could wield to derive (usually financial) benefit
from it, thereby coercing others to create works of their own. Without getting
mired in the specifics of copyright law, the intricacies of which have been
explained at length elsewhere, the whole shooting match was designed to
safeguard creativity in modern society. In the words of Lawrence Lessing
("Innovating Copyright", Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal, 20:611-623):

> The owner of a still live copyright, that is, one that has not yet expired,
> controls the rights of others to produce derivative works. ...  At least until
> that copyright expires, though the idea of copyright expiring seems itself an
> expired idea.

Under copyright law, the creator of an original work automatically receives full
rights to its use. Only through a specific exception can certain rights be
surrendered and others retained, at least until the copyright lapses. In
America's litigious climate, even such a simple thing as stating "you may use
this song of mine to make remixes but you can't charge money for them" requires
pages of _legalese_ to avoid ambiguity. That's where the Creative Commons comes
in.

## Understanding the Creative Commons

Creative Commons "provides free tools that let authors, scientists, artists, and
educators easily mark their creative work with the freedoms they want it to
carry." Their chief contribution is in the form of "licenses," which are
basically rules of use for creative work stated in defensible legal terms,
written by lawyers. Using their
handy [license selection questionnaire](http://creativecommons.org/license/),
you can simply choose the rights you wish to yield to others and the appropriate
Creative Commons (or "CC" for short) license will be provided to you.

There are three major categories of rights that CC licenses allow you to
control:

* Attribution

* Commericial use

* Derivative works

Attribution means receiving credit, or some indication of ownership.  Typically
that means a piece of accompanying text containing your name, and possibly the
same information in the metadata. Attribution is *polite* and it appears in the
license only because you may wish to waive it, and for completeness. I hope that
all of you out there give credit where credit is due without being forced to by
a lawyer.

Commercial use is exactly what it sounds like. A work tagged for commercial use
means you don't mind if someone uses it to make money on their own somehow, and
one tagged for no commercial use means the opposite.

Derivative works is an interesting twist on copyright law. Under US copyright
law, derivative works are almost always permitted, and disputes over whether
certain works are suitably different from the originals to be considered
"derivative" or whether it's plagiarism has typically been a decision for the
courts. This right permits or denies end users from deriving new creative works
from yours, period. In my opinion, denying derivative works is contrary to
creation as a whole, but CC leaves the ball in your court.

There is another license attribute used in two of CC's six major licenses called
"share alike," which means that work based on yours must carry the same (or
suitably similar) license as yours. This is much like the idea of the GNU
General Public License (GNU GPL) for open source software.

Each of these categories can be toggled "on" and "off" using the CC license
selection questionnaire, and each combination of desired rights has its own CC
license, presented in full, specific, defensible legal jargon. They even give
you pretty little buttons to use on web-based copies of your work that link to
the license's page on CC's website and announce that you have released some (or
none) of these rights to end users.

In addition to the buttons, there is a "deed" page on CC's website for each of
their licenses, which spells out in very simple and easy-to-understand language
what you are permitted and not permitted to do with work carrying that
license. Each deed is then linked to the full text of the license for the
hardened lawyers among us.

## If You Love Something, Let It Go...

I believe in sharing. In my [Web Rules for Photographers][wrp] article, I stated
that "sharing is caring," and I stand behind that. I am not anti-capitalist, nor
would I deny anyone the fruits of their labor, but sometimes a little bit of
giving goes a long way.

[wrp]: {% post_url 2007-06-20-web-rules-for-photographers %}

Let me break this down from a photographer's perspective. I had the opportunity
a couple of years ago to photograph the abandoned and decrepit Mansfield
Training School, which was a hospital for mentally retarded children in
Mansfield, Connecticut from around the turn of the century until about 1993. Of
all my photographs, the ones I took inside that place seem to be the most
popular, and generate the most traffic from web searches simply due to the
scarcity of photographs and information about the place. I have been contacted
by several people looking for directions to it and more information about it.

People who search Google for "Mansfield Training School" inevitably find my
gallery, and I think that's pretty sweet. Some time later, as someone was
editing the "Mansfield, Connecticut" article on Wikipedia, they thought to
mention the Mansfield Training School in its "Places of Interest" section, and
linked to my gallery page, undoubtedly found in a search.

When a friend of mine pointed out that I had been linked from Wikipedia, I
immediately thought two things simultaneously: 1) that's really cool, and 2) can
I make more out of this? Contributing to Wikipedia is one of those things that
can be helpful to you and to others at the same time, and I like helping myself
at least as much as I like helping others, so I decided to contribute more. What
I actually did was to select a photo from my Mansfield Training School gallery
and place it on the Wikipedia article page.

Wikipedia requires a fairly comprehensive copyright history for items submitted
to its site, and for good reason: used as a reference, Wikipedia's media items
should be at least as free (as in speech) as items published in traditional
print encyclopedias. To that end, they require a selection from a fairly long
list of licenses from popular sources including Creative Commons, GNU, and
others.

What this meant for me was that I would have to give up some rights to that
particular work in order for it to appear on Wikipedia. Aside from the
intangible exposure I would gain from it, and of course my own sense of
altrusim, I hoped to see a bit of traffic from my submission.

Being the generous man that I am, I selected
the [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.5 license][ccas] (the link leads
to the "deed" page, conveniently available in about 30 languages), which means
that you are free to copy, distribute, transmit, remix, and adapt the work as
long as what you create from it carries the same license and that I am credited
for the original if displayed in any way.

[ccas]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/

I think that releasing a portion of your work in this way, especially in a
high-traffic and high-exposure location such as Wikipedia, can definitely pay
off in terms of recognition (both for the work itself as well as your reputation
for generosity) and help to promote your other work, to which you retain all
rights. Give a little, get a lot.

The way I see it, if everyone gives a little, we all gain a lot.

## Postscript

If you are serious about protecting your copyrights, you may wish to officially
register your work with the United States Copyright office.  It isn't terribly
difficult or expensive, and it will give you huge leverage if you ever take a
claim to court. For more information, check out [Copyright Office Basics][cob]
on the Copyright Office's website.

[cob]: https://www.copyright.gov/register/performing.html
