---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Art Concepts in Photography, Part 1: Texture'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 135
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/08/02/art-concepts-in-photography-part-1-texture/
date: '2007-08-02 18:32:00 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-08-02 22:32:00 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- art
- guide
- lightroom
- design
- technique
- texture
comments:
---

{% img drop center /ssp/27Mar07-01.jpg %}

Having spent most of my developing years surrounded by it, I have always
taken for granted many of the fundamental guidelines of art. Perhaps due
to the complexity of its technical aspects, formal photography courses
tend to focus (no pun intended) on the equipment and techniques of
creating images and not as much on their content.

Learning the traditional "rules" of art (or what I would call the rules
of design) is important for two specific reasons. First and foremost, to
*make your work better*. Following the rules--as well as judiciously
breaking them--will strengthen your compositions, but you need to know
what they are before you can do either. Second, to *enhance your
critiquing ability*. By learning the basic terminology of art you will
be able to take full advantage of critique from your peers as well as
articulate your own.

So let's get started! Today I'll be discussing _texture_.~~MORE~~

So what exactly is texture?

**texture** _adj._ (pl. *textures*)

1. The feel or shape of a surface or substance; the smoothness, roughness,
   softness, etc. of something

In painting, texture is sometimes used to add dimension to a piece
beyond its mere color and shape. The technique of building up thick
layers of paint to form raised peaks and waves is called _impasto_ and
has been in use for centuries. Masters such as Rembrandt as well as
notable modern artists such as DeKooning were big fans of impasto. Light
reflects off of the contoured surfaces of raised paint, sometimes
casting small shadows, allowing the painter to create additional levels
of realism in fabrics or to add the impression of motion.

In photography, texture can play a significant aesthetic role. With help
from its best friend _contrast_ (which I'll cover in detail later),
texture adds important tactile cues that can give the viewer an
immediate experience of what they're looking at.

Behold, _Figure 1_.

{% img drop center /ssp/27Mar07-01.jpg %}

I made this photograph at the park in March while I was sitting around
watching people fly their kites and throw their Frisbees. It's actually
my knee, clad in corduroy, but shot with my Sigma 105mm f/2.8 macro
lens. When I look at this image, I feel as though I could almost touch
the surface of the material. I have a very real sense of what it would
be like to touch it, and that's the key to using texture.

I chose this photograph as an example not because it is a singular work
of art, or even among my favorites, but because it exemplifies the use
of texture as the subject; there is very little else in this image that
is interesting. In post-processing (using Lightroom), I chose the
"strong contrast" tonal curve preset, which deepens the shadows and
boosts the highlights. Contrast and texture are intimately related
because the cues that give us the impression of textures in an image are
all formed through contrast. Keep that in mind.

Now, _Figure 2_.

{% img drop center /ssp/27Mar07-02.jpg %}

Tree bark is a ubiquitous source of texture in photography--and for good
reason. In this image, the light through the branches of the tree
strongly reveals the bark's texture because of its downward angle. Once
again, using the tone curve adjustments in Lightroom allowed me to
enhance the textural effect. I also used Lightroom's built-in sharpening
(which many in the field have criticized, but I like just fine thank
you) to further punch up the roughness.

This is a good case of a subject that, from a distance and shot in a
traditional way, would probably have yielded an image of limited
interest. Especially considering the bright midday sun and stark
shadows, it would be hard to achieve anything too pleasing. Keeping
texture in mind, however, introduces new possibilities for using the
situation to best advantage. Having a mental library of compositional
techniques may allow you to make very nice photographs in locations or
at times that are inappropriate for your preferred style.

Finally, _Figure 3_.

{% img drop center /ssp/27Mar07-03.jpg %}

In the above piece, texture is only one player on a team of
compositional tools including contrast, line, form, and depth; design
elements that I will be discussing in more detail in future installments
of this series. Once again focusing my post-processing efforts on the
tone curve and sharpening tools, I have enhanced the prominence of the
ground's texture as well as the surface of the pole.

Speaking in purely photographic terms, capturing textures is tied most
strongly to aperture. The above photograph was exposed at f/8, which was
sufficient to keep the pole and nearby ground (where the texture was
most interesting to me) in focus while still allowing the background to
fall away into soft bokeh. Because texture does best at smaller
apertures, textural images are best achieved under brighter conditions,
which allows some of the best textural photographs to be made during the
bright, raking light of the midday sun--a time of day _scorned_ by
landscape photographers the world over.

The aperture in SLR cameras always remains fully open to its widest
setting so that the view through the eyepiece is as bright as possible.
When you press the shutter button, your selected aperture setting is
applied before the film or sensor is exposed, but you can't see any of
that because by then the shutter has been closed and the mirror flipped
up. In order to get a better idea of what your textural subject will
look like at different aperture settings, you should use the "aperture
preview" button if you have one. This button, when held, will stop the
aperture down to your selected setting. I use this button
_constantly_.

You may have taken note of the fact that my three example photographs
are in black and white. There is no reason that texture cannot be a
prominent feature of a color photograph, but in my mind a photograph
only deserves to be presented in color when the color _itself_ is a
prominent player. Also, black and white images have a more flexible
tonal range because the underlying colors can be adjusted independently
before the conversion to black and white. Lightroom handles this
magnificently with its "Grayscale Mix" palette. With a broader tonal
range to work with, your textures can be adjusted intricately.

Hopefully this article has given you a better understanding of the part
texture can play in your images and how to enhance it by paying
attention to contrast and tonality. In upcoming articles I will dive yet
deeper into design concepts, so stay tuned, and feel free to bury me in
questions and comments!
