---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Counting the Days Till California
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 106
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/04/26/counting-the-days-till-california/
date: '2007-04-26 12:17:29 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-04-26 16:17:29 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags: []
comments: []
---
On Saturday morning I'll be hopping on a plane up here in Boston to take
me out to California. I'll be landing in San Francisco and then driving
from there to Yosemite National Park for a solid four days of shooting.
Yosemite has often been described as "the most beautiful place in the
world," but probably has a better chance at "most beautiful place in
America." It's a mightily subjective title, but who am I to argue?

I will stand in many of the places where Ansel Adams stood and was
touched by the unique beauty of the American West. With preparation and
some luck, I will return with a great deal of images to share with you
all.

I apologize for not posting as much as usual, but the preparations for
this voyage have monopolized my attention. To make it up to you, here
are some photography travel tips that might be helpful.~~MORE~~

## Make a List

I am not a huge "fly by the seat of your pants" kinda guy. I like to be
prepared for things and I'm utterly forgetful, so I require more
planning than most to ensure a smooth trip. The first thing that I do
when I'm going on a trip like this is _make a list_. I shared this tip
when I went on my Death Valley trip, but it's still true. Make a list of
_everything_ you are going to bring.

For me, I need to look at where I'm going to be each day, check the
weather forecasts, and plan my wardrobe accordingly. Yosemite Valley
sits about 5,000 feet above sea level, which makes it slightly cooler
there than in neighboring metropolitan California (San Francisco, Santa
Cruz, etc.). If you are able to hike or drive to higher elevations, you
will still see snow at this time of year and temperatures can be quite
cold. The weather at night, even in the Valley, will not be warm. I have
planned to bring a coat, gloves, and a hat, which I will have to pack
because it's too warm here to wear them!

I also make a list of every item of equipment I'm going to bring. Once
I've used the list to make sure I have everything I will need, I take
the list with me to make sure I return home with all of it. When I came
home from Death Valley, I discovered that I had left my USB memory card
reader somewhere in the hotel. That's a \$35.00 expense that a
completely free list could have saved me! Lesson learned.

## Pack Efficiently

When it comes to traveling with 50 pounds of expensive photography and
computer equipment, I opt for the carry-on approach. I have a sizable
photography backpack (the Tamrac CyberPack), which is the largest bag
that can be fit into the overhead compartment on international airlines
(even though I haven't flown on one yet). I manage to cram all of my
photography equipment and my laptop into that one bag so it never leaves
my side (or back). Otherwise, I travel light. One checked bag and one
"additional carry-on bag," which is typically a second camera bag filled
with other things (such as a Nintendo DS and an iPod; photographers can
also be nerds).

## Fly Direct

Whenever possible, I take direct flights. Even if the departure or
arrival times are less convenient, nothing beats skipping the whole
layover mess. You can't lose your luggage if it doesn't have to change
planes, and you can't miss your connecting flight if there isn't one, so
take it from me--whenever possible, fly direct!

## Study Your Destination

Part of being prepared is having some rough itinerary drawn up. Even if
you don't follow it to the letter, it's nice to have a general idea of
what sights you want to see and, more importantly, *when* you want to
see them. If there are spectacular sunrise or sunset locations, make
sure you know which ones those are and how long it will take to get to
them. Knowing these things will help you to plan your locations
efficiently; shoot a gorgeous sunset at a location with a nearby
gorgeous sunrise if you're too far from your lodging to drive back in
between. Remember, there's no shame in sleeping in your rental car.

Wikipedia is a solid reference for national parks and even most cities.
Once you get a good overview of the location, you can scour the web for
location-specific sites. If you're traveling to a city, the city
probably has its own tourism website with ideas and photos to get your
imagination churning. For national parks, there's always the [National
Park Service](http://www.nps.gov). They have a swell [page on
Yosemite](http://www.nps.gov/yose/).

If you're going to a park or natural attraction, *buy a map*. You
can't do any better than a [National Geographic U.S. Park
Map](http://www.ngmapstore.com/jump.jsp?itemID=53&itemType=CATEGORY).
Their maps are tear-resistant, waterproof, and exquisitely detailed.

## That's All, Folks

I hope that at least one of these tips was helpful for burgeoning travel
photography hobbyists out there. I'll try to post as much as I can when
I finally reach a hotel with Internet access! Until then, friends, adieu
and keep shooting.
