---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Protecting Our National Parks: One Photographer''s Story'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 149
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/10/16/protecting-our-national-parks-one-photographers-story/
date: '2007-10-16 21:53:24 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-10-17 01:53:24 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- law
- light
- nps
- environment
- regulations
comments:
- id: 979
  author: A Roundup of Environmental Photography | Epic Edits Weblog
  author_email: ''
  author_url: http://blog.epicedits.com/2007/10/20/a-roundup-of-environmental-photography/
  date: '2007-10-20 03:23:55 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-10-20 07:23:55 -0400'
  content: '[...] Protecting Our National Parks: One Photographerâ€™s Story Single-Serving
    Photo [...]'
- id: 997
  author: richard S
  author_email: rfswearinger@ishsi.com
  author_url: ''
  date: '2007-10-27 19:26:11 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-10-27 23:26:11 -0400'
  content: I completely understand the ranger's worries. There is a sizeable number
    of idiots out there who would not hesitate to jacklight deer a few hundred yards
    from a ranger station. They're the same meatheads who shoot in the direction of
    inhabited dwellings, leave stock gates open, and don't go after their wounded
    game.
- id: 999
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-10-27 22:08:57 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-10-28 02:08:57 -0400'
  content: Hi Richard. I understand that the ranger was doing his duty, but to shake
    us down the way he did under the circumstances did seem, if only somewhat, excessive.
    Nevertheless, I'm glad someone is out there protecting the land and wildlife from
    the abuses you aptly described. Thanks for your comment.
---
Because we, as photographers, so often use nature and the natural
environment around us as subject matter in our work, it behooves us to
try our best to preserve it. It's very important when photographing in
nature that we recognize our impact on the environment and do our best
to minimize it.

In the Great Smoky Mountains this past week, I got a very personal
introduction to one way our photography can greatly disturb the
environment and so today I will talk about it.

[![](http://blogactionday.org/images/action_468x60.jpg)](http://blogactionday.org)

This is my contribution to Blog Action Day, joining 15,000 fellow
bloggers in raising awareness of environmental issues. (Yes, I know it
was yesterday. Better late than never!)~~MORE~~

National parks are truly environmental treasures. Not only does the
National Park Service protect the land, geology, and flora of the parks,
but it also studies and assists the indigenous creatures that live in
each of its nearly 400 sites. Because these locations are more readily
accessible and better documented than the untamed wilderness (of which
there is very little remaining in America), and because they were
preserved for their unique beauty and significance in the culture and
history of this country, they are obvious destinations for outdoors
photographers.

While photographing in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, which
straddles the line between Tennessee and North Carolina, I was made
forcefully aware of some of the dangers these parks face and how
important it is that we contribute to their protection.

## Painting the Night

"Light painting," or using flashlights to illuminate objects during long
exposures in the dark, is one of the staples of outdoor photography, and
I think it's a fairly common practice; you'll see it used by [The
Nocturnes](http://www.thenocturnes.com) and others who are into making
images after dark. Having used the technique to to great effect in Death
Valley and in Yosemite, it went without saying that my colleague Chris
and I would find such opportunities in the Smokies.

Our plan was to enter Cades Cove after dark and scout out a location.
Ideally, we wanted to hike down to the Primitive Baptist Church, which
is 2.4 miles each way from the public parking lot. You can't drive down
the road because the gates leading into the Cades Cove loop are locked
at sunset. After walking for some time, we decided to stop and set up
along a barbed wire fence and get a feel for the night. The fence stood
between the narrow road and a large field with a solitary tree standing
a few hundred feet away. It seemed a good enough spot with a lot of
visible sky, so we set up our gear.

$image:right![](/ssp/11Oct07-01.jpg$)

My composition placed the faraway tree front-and-center with the barbed
wire fence in the foreground, which I thought would give a nice sense of
depth to the image. After exposing for twenty minutes, occasionally
yelling out "Hey bear!" to make sure any of the 1,600 black bears in the
park would know we were there ((Black bears don't want trouble, but they
just _hate_ surprises.)), we painted the fence with a headlamp and I
decided I should paint the tree with one of our 1,000,000 candlepower
lights.

We made two exposures this way when Chris saw bright lights at the top
of the road by the gate. There are only two major fears photographers
have in the woods at night: one is the fear of being mauled or eaten
alive by hungry black bears preparing for hibernation, and two is the
fear of someone spoiling your 45-minute exposure with a careless wave of
their flashlight. The second fear, of course, is much more gripping. The
lights proceeded toward us. Knowing that they had passed the locked
gate, we could be sure it was a ranger. But what business might a ranger
have in that dark place at that hour? Surely we were simply two benign
photographers walking the trails and roads as any other visitors might.

## Touched by a Ranger

"Step into the road where I can see you," came the ranger's commanding
voice. The sound seemed to come from a tall, black void in the wall of
pure, blinding whiteness pouring over us from the seven lights on the
ranger's car. We did as he asked. "I need you to empty your pockets.
Take everything out and put it on the ground and turn your pockets out."
A strange request; perhaps they check random people to make sure they
don't have contraband or something. Yes, that's it, and this ranger
decided that the best place to look for tourist pranksters would be down
this _gated road_ in the _inky black of night..._

Before I knew it I was standing with my hands behind my head getting
thoroughly and deeply _frisked_ by a national park ranger. For those
casual readers out there among you, I am not a man who has even once
been suspected of anything by the Powers That Be, let alone _deeply
frisked_. A minute later I'm sitting by a tree with my legs crossed
watching the same fate befall my partner. What was to become of us?

"Are there any more flashlights here? Do you boys have more
flashlights?"

"Yes sir, there is one there by our bags," I replied. He fetched it.
Turning now to my associate, he poised the question,

"Do you what's going to happen if I shine this into your eyes?"

"I'll be blinded," my pal answered.

"That's right. You'll be blinded. Now how do you s'pose an animal is
going to feel when you shine this at them?"

Thus the story began to unfold. The ranger explained that
"spotlighting," or shining bright lights into the woods and such, is
frowned upon. Moreover, such behavior is indicative of *poachers*. He
went on to say that using headlamps to walk and shining lights briefly
into the woods if an animal might be approaching is OK, but shining one
million candlepower flashlights across fields is more like what people
do when they're searching for some wild game to illegally sneak away
with.

Why anyone would poach animals 500 yards from a ranger station (as we
were) is beyond me, and the question of exactly how extraordinary a
power trip that ranger was on still remains. Nevertheless, each national
park in America is permitted to set their own rules of behavior
governing the use of artificial light and the points made by the ranger
that night were valid ones.

Take it from me, you do _not_ want to be rigorously patted down by a
ranger in the middle of the night, so be sure to ask the rangers at any
park you're visiting about applicable regulations. Remember also that
you're not alone out there. We all have a responsibility to remain
mindful of our impact on indigenous wildlife and to respect the park as
their home... Because that's what it is.
