---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Death Valley Workshop, April 2008
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 145
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/09/14/death-valley-workshop-april-2008/
date: '2007-09-14 19:51:44 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-09-14 23:51:44 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- art
- guide
- technique
- advice
- travel
- trip
- workshop
- news
comments:
- id: 952
  author: photographyVoter.com
  author_email: ''
  author_url: http://photographyvoter.com/story.php?id=2035
  date: '2007-09-15 11:52:14 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-09-15 15:52:14 -0400'
  content: |-
    Death Valley Workshop, April 2008...

    An exciting four-day workshop in Death Valley open to photographers of all skill levels organized and led by two professionals....
---
$image:right/Places/DeathValley/LongWaytoNowhere.jpg$

I am very excited to announce a photography workshop in Death Valley
National Park, California, hosted by Christopher Blake and Aaron Bieber
(that's me!), to take place in April of 2008.

This will be a thrilling four-day workshop in Death Valley open to
photographers of all skill levels. We'll spend four days and nights
making photographs from before sunrise until well into the night. Aaron
and Chris will serve as your guides to aesthetic approach and technical
application as you explore some of these breathtaking Death Valley
locations:

* Badwater
 * Artist's Palette
 * Dante's View
 * Stovepipe Well Dunes
 * Eureka Dunes
 * Golden Canyon
 * Devil's Golf Course
 * The Alabama Hills
 * and more!

<div class="one-image align-left" style="float: left;">

[![](http://curiouslens.com/d/3728-2/1-DV-BadWater.jpg)](http://curiouslens.com/deathvalley/BadWater/1-DV-BadWater.jpg.html)

</div>

There will be a strong focus on night photography including work with
light painting and star trails. This workshop is designed to coincide
with the new moon, giving us nights filled with stars. If you have never
done photography at night before, or if you want to get better at it,
this is the right workshop for you. Between the two of us we have 12
years of experience making wonderful images at night.

This workshop gives you the opportunity to photograph a famous and
unique location with two professional photographers who will help you
get the *most* out of every hour and out of every exposure.

## Who should attend this workshop?

Anyone who wants to advance their photography skills and get the
absolute most out of a trip to Death Valley. In a limited amount of time
we'll bring you to the best locations at the best times and work with
you both in the field and in front of the computer to help you get great
results.

## Itinerary

Here's the plan.

### Friday April 4th

$image:right/Places/DeathValley/Tendrils.jpg$

We will meet in the afternoon (you'll be emailed the exact time and
place to meet at least two weeks prior to the workshop). Each
participant will receive a workshop package including information and
equipment (listed below). We will then have introductions, get to know
one another, and get a feel for what each of you hope to accomplish
during the workshop. We will set out in the early evening to photograph
sunset and then do an introduction to night photography.

### Saturday April 5th - Monday April 7th

Each day of the workshop will be broken up into three sessions,
described here:

*Session 1 - Dawn*

We'll meet in an agreed upon location and set out to photograph dawn,
then return to the inn for breakfast.

*Session 2 - Late morning*

<div class="one-image align-left" style="float: left;">

[![](http://curiouslens.com/d/3770-2/3-DV-DGC.jpg)](http://curiouslens.com/deathvalley/DevilsGolfCourse/3-DV-DGC.jpg.html)

</div>

After breakfast we'll get together to review the work we've done so far,
go over any questions, and plan shooting locations for the remainder of
the day. Participants who shoot digital and have a laptop with them are
welcome to share their work with the group. Chris and Aaron will be
available to do one-on-one critiques and offer guidance.

There are a few locations that can be effective during morning and
afternoon sun, such as Golden Canyon, so we may opt to explore one of
those locations together during the day. If you wish to explore on your
own, you are welcome to.

*Session 3 - Sunset*

$image:right/Places/DeathValley/SilverOrb.jpg.html$

We will travel to our chosen location to photograph sunset. After night
falls, we will commence night photography sessions. It is not unusual
for the ambitious in the group to photograph well into the night.

Note: Some of you may not want to join us for the next sunrise session.
You can meet us at breakfast, normally around 9-9:30 AM.

Since the conditions in Death Valley change from day to day, it's
impossible to predict the perfect location for each session. Both Chris
and Aaron have a good deal of experience with Death Valley and will plan
our locations to best fit the changing conditions. Our first priority is
making great photographs, no matter what the circumstances.

Though we will be photographing locations as a group, each will offer
the opportunity to spread out across a large area. Two-way radios can
come in handy, so we're going to give you one. It's an effective method
for the group to communicate across distances of a mile or more, and
we'll also use the radios to communicate between vehicles while
traveling to each location.

## Registration

<div class="one-image align-left" style="float: left;">

[![](http://curiouslens.com/d/3625-2/6-DV-AP.jpg)](http://curiouslens.com/deathvalley/artistpalette/6-DV-AP.jpg.html)

</div>

The cost of this once-in-a-lifetime experience is only \$1,199 and is
open to photographers of all skill levels. To register, please "send us
an email":mailto:dvworkshop@fisheyegallery.com. We accept all major
credit cards as well as personal checks. After you contact us, we'll
mail you our registration package. Workshops are filled on a first-come
first-served basis, so don't miss out!

Workshop fees are refundable up to 60 days before the workshop, less 10%
for processing fees. Within 60 days of the workshop a refund is not
possible.

Please feel free to e-mail us with any questions.

This workshop will have a maximum of ten participants. Sorry, but no
guests are permitted to tag along. We find that the group is most
focused and productive when we are all actively photographing, and we
don't want to dilute the experience for any of our attendees.

### Important Notes

* This is not an all-inclusive trip and as such does not include
transportation, food, or lodging. Your registration package will contain
a thorough list of available hotels and campgrounds as well as our
advice on staying in Death Valley.
 * Though meal cost is not included, we'll eat at the same time each
day and you may wish to join us, or feel free to go out on your own
during this time.
 * Your registration package will also include detailed information on
the trip as well as a very basic questionnaire that we use to tailor the
workshop for you.
 * We will not be taking any long hikes, but some hiking will be
required. This is not a stressful amount of exercise by any means, but
you should be in decent physical shape and able to navigate the
irregular desert terrain.

## Gear

You'll need some things on this trip...

### What you should bring

$image:right/Places/DeathValley/DevilsLandscape.jpg.html$

Although this workshop is open to all skill levels, you should have at
least a 35mm SLR (digital or film) camera and a tripod. You should also
have a basic understanding of how your camera works. We would be glad to
help you get the most out of your equipment while on the workshop, but
it won't be a fundamental course, so be sure you are familiar with the
basics.

If you want to brush up or review, you may want to read these articles
(posted here):
 * [Histograms,
Huh?](/articles/2007/06/03/histograms-huh/)
 * [Be a Control Freak--Shooting Modes
Explained](/articles/2007/05/29/be-a-control-freak-shooting-modes-explained/)
 * [Focal Length Reciprocal
Rule](/articles/2007/05/22/focal-length-reciprocal-rule/)

And also these assorted articles from Earthbound Light Photography:
 * [I Bought a Digital Camera But My Photos Are Still
Blurry](http://www.earthboundlight.com/phototips/digital-photography-still-photography.html)
 * [Program vs. Aperture Priority vs. Shutter Priority vs.
Manual](http://www.earthboundlight.com/phototips/program-aperture-shutter-priority-manual-exposure.html)

If you are interested in advice on what to bring (or what to buy), you
can "email Chris":mailto:cblake@curiouslens.com. He has a lot of
equipment experience and would be happy to share it with you.

The weather in Death Valley can go from very warm to very cold. You
should pack accordingly, keeping in mind that in windy conditions before
dawn and after the sun goes down it can feel very cold.

### What we will give you

<div class="one-image align-left" style="float: left;">

[![](http://curiouslens.com/d/3610-2/14-DV-AP.jpg)](http://curiouslens.com/deathvalley/artistpalette/14-DV-AP.jpg.html)

</div>

As part of the workshop experience, we will provide you with a few
essential items that we have found to be indispensable on these trips.
The Death Valley Workshop package includes a GMRS(General Mobile Radio
Service) (family band) two-way radio with several-mile range; a bright
xenon flashlight for light painting and general navigation; a rugged,
waterproof National Geographic map of the park that we will refer to
often; and lots of information about the art and science of
photographing on location and specifically in Death Valley. All of these
items are, of course, yours to keep.

## Who are you?

Here's a little about us and why you're going to love to learn and
explore with us in Death Valley.

### Christopher Blake

I am a fine art travel photographer living in the Boston area. I have
worked exclusively with digital cameras for the past six years, focusing
on traditional fine art landscapes, HDR (high dynamic range), and night
photography. I have an extensive background in information technology
and I leverage that knowledge to get the most out of my photographs. I
am excited to share my experience in travel photography with you in
Death Valley!

View Chris's gallery, [The Curious Lens](http://www.curiouslens.com.)

### Aaron Bieber

I am an illustrator, photographer, web and graphic designer living and
working on the scenic Connecticut coast (I am also the author of this
blog). Though I have been very serious about photography for many years,
I come from a traditional art background and I have written at length on
the topics of photography as an art form and the techniques and
practices unique to photography as a medium for artistic expression. My
main interests in photography are geometric abstractions and exploring
the invisible world as can only be seen through the lens of a camera.

With over ten years of Photoshop experience and as an outspoken fan of
Photoshop Lightroom, I do my best work in post-production. I look
forward to helping you make the most of a very unique experience during
this workshop!

View Aaron's gallery, [Fisheye Multimedia
Galleries](http://www.fisheyegallery.com)

## Ready to Register?

Just send an e-mail to "Death Valley Workshop
registration":mailto:dvworkshop@fisheyegallery.com and let us know!
