---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Going Pro: Can You Do It?'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 158
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/11/23/going-pro-can-you-do-it/
date: '2007-11-23 12:49:35 -0500'
date_gmt: '2007-11-23 16:49:35 -0500'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- discussion
- business
comments: []
---
One of the most popular questions asked throughout the photography blogs
that I read and on other discussion sites is "How can I go pro?" or "Can
I make a living with my photography?" Everyone seems to have a different
answer and the responses vary a lot depending on whether the individual
answering is a working pro, and if they are, what industry they work in.

Despite plentiful arguments to the contrary, I do believe that
photography can be a viable full-time job. Making it work for you
requires flexibility and understanding of the marketplace.~~MORE~~

Paul Indigo over at [Beyond the
Obvious](http://paulindigo.blogspot.com/2007/11/is-professional-photography-still).html
writes that the "quality of photography in corporate brochures and
magazines is often appalling and the trade press is not much better" and
the "reputation for superb photography once held by the UK broadsheets
is more than a little tarnished" due to what he calls "a new level of
democratisation" wherein everyone is a photographer and putting your
entry-level SLR on automatic or program mode gets you salable results
most of the time.

Paul's major evidence for the rise in marketability of what he would
describe as sub-par photography is the thriving "microstock" agencies
such as iStockPhoto, SmugMug, and so on who sell grandma's
point-and-shoot exposures for \$1.00 apiece. In order to understand how
microstocks affect your business, however, you have to get into the
economics of free trade.

Enter Dan Heller, outspoken stock photographer and armchair industry
analyst. Back in March, Dan wrote a [thorough
op-ed](http://www.danheller.com/blog/posts/myth-that-microstock-agencies-hurt.html)
on the effect microstock agencies have on the industry of stock
photography (his main source of income) with the conclusion that a
myriad of factors outside of price affect the marketability of stock
images and that stock agencies are hurting nobody but themselves by
offering such inexpensive alternatives to high quality, professional
stock photographs.

I'm not going to quote or paraphrase Dan's lengthy analysis, but I
encourage you to take a skim through it for the juicy bits. Though Paul
Indigo and Dan Heller operate in slightly different industries and on
different sides of the Atlantic Ocean, both make compelling arguments
from within their own experience.

At the beginning of this article I said that photographers have to be
"flexible." What I meant by that is not that a photographer should have
the ability to cross their legs behind their head, but rather that a
photographer should stay open-minded to available revenue sources within
the industry as a whole. Within the photography industry there are at
least this many distinct specialties that offer opportunities to profit:

* Stock/travel
 * Studio/portraiture/fashion/glamour
 * How-to/writing/teaching/blogging
 * Photojournalism
 * Commercial/product/food/commissioned
 * Fine art

There are probably more that didn't come to mind. My point is that the
business of photography is like any other business out there: you have
to be willing to change with the demands of the marketplace and find new
avenues to reach potential customers. If your stock sales falter, you
might consider mining your library for fine art prints and showing in
local galleries, putting together a book of your best work, and so on.

Although fine art prints has been my primary source of income, sales are
variable and it's hard to predict what any month's sales are going to be
like, especially in the fine art world. Diversification is a great tool
to supplement the income of a business and so I have started to do
[in-the-field workshops](http://www.artphotoworkshops.com) to share my
experience with others who want to get more serious making photographs.

In addition to actual "shooting workshops," which consist almost
entirely of in-the-field, hands-on photography, I'll also be teaching an
[introduction to the digital
workflow](http://www.artphotoworkshops.com/2008/July/CalypsoWorkflowClass)
course at Calypso Imaging in Santa Cruz, one of the top photo labs in
the country. Students will have access to their million-dollar lightjet
printer, large-format Epson plotters, and will be given three-days of
intensive guidance through Adobe Bridge, Lightroom, Photoshop, and more.

I see workshops not only as a way to make money, but also an opportunity
to give back to the photographic community in what small way I can. I
know that photography can be a hard business to get into, but it does
offer a great deal of satisfaction and, yes, profit as well. So don't
give up!
