---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Photoshop CS3: Overrated'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 150
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/10/17/photoshop-cs3-overrated/
date: '2007-10-17 11:40:46 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-10-17 15:40:46 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- photoshop
- software
- review
comments:
- id: 967
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-10-17 15:21:04 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-10-17 19:21:05 -0400'
  content: And Earthbound Light shares with us [yet another feature](http://www.earthboundlight.com/phototips/brightness-contrast-photoshop-cs3.html)
    I'm missing out on because Adobe can't make painting work correctly in CS3.
---
I've been a *devout* Photoshop user for over a decade. The first
version of Photoshop that I ever laid hands on was 2.0... That's
_pre-layers_, and also the first version available for Windows! I
started using it seriously around version 4.0 and I have kept up with
nearly every version since then. I remember distinctly the addition of
_effects layers_, _shape layers_, and the creation of the verb "to
Photoshop" (which Adobe officially frowns upon).

Originally, I used Photoshop to create everything from promotional
stickers and web graphics to letterhead and stationery. Eventually I
moved to Illustrator for layout/drawing stuff, but Photoshop remains a
huge part of my daily life. As the owner and sole employee of [Fisheye
Multimedia](http://www.fisheyemultimedia.com), I am called upon to repair
and modify photographs for my clients and to manipulate newspaper
layouts for framing. As a photographer myself, I spend hours upon hours
in Lightroom and Photoshop, tweaking masks, adjusting curves, cloning
and healing, and so on.

I am a _very particular_ Photoshop user with specific needs and
expectations established by years of use. Photoshop CS3 is a piece of
crap. ~~MORE~~

I moved to Creative Suite 1 a good while after its release and it really
fit the bill for me. Its adjustment layers and effects layers were
immensely helpful in my professional photo restoration tasks and the
program was about as efficient as I could expect it to be. When Creative
Suite 2 was released, I was peripherally excited about its new features,
but because I had no direct application for most of them, I didn't jump
on it. Creative Suite 3 was released six months ago and again I looked
at the features and decided it wasn't worth the trouble of rocking the
boat... My very efficient and comfortable boat in which everything
worked precisely as it should.

Then I bought a new computer. An 8-core 3GHz Mac Pro with five gigs of
RAM and the 30-inch cinema display; the works. After six years with the
same dual 1.24GHz G4, I figured it was time to go cutting edge. My G4
was cutting edge when I bought it, but then I watched the G5s come and
go, and then the transition to Intel processors, and I felt a bit left
out. My machine couldn't even run Aperture because Apple made an
executive decision that you must have at least a G5 to run it. Bummer!

With the new computer I thought I would finally upgrade Photoshop and
give Creative Suite 3 a try. I'd heard a lot of great things about it
from other photographers, notably my colleague [Chris
Blake](http://www.curiouslens.com). It seemed to work for them, so it
should treat me well. I downloaded a trial.

In the defense of Photoshop CS3, I think the new GUI layout with the
palette wells and everything else is top notch. It's high time they made
the floating palette system more efficient and I love the highlighting
of certain menu items and re-arranging of palettes based on workspace
presets. I was very excited at first, as I usually am when I get into
some new software or hardware (nerds are so easy to please). That is,
until I tried drawing something.

I agreed to do a quick cartoon logo for a friend's up and coming
e-commerce site, so I settled in to do some sketches. As I started to
draw, I realized that the brush strokes were lagging behind my cursor as
though my computer was too slow. Couldn't be! I gave up on the project
and did some research.

All I could find of any use was [this
thread](http://forum.adobe.com/webx?14@@).3bc3c251/90 on Adobe's "User to
User" forum. I do believe that the original poster of this thread had my
exact problem, but nobody could produce any successful fixes for it.

Among the suggestions were:

* Install the [Force VM Buffering
On/Off](http://www.adobe.com/support/downloads/detail.jsp?ftpID=3623)
Plug-In from Adobe ([Read
Me](http://www.adobe.com/special/photoshop/vm_buffering/vm_buffering_optional_extensions_ReadMe.html))
 * Enable the "Bigger Tiles" Plug-In (included)
 * Set the "cache levels" setting 5 or lower (default is 6)

I tried each of these suggestions and none of them changed the
responsiveness of the paintbrush.

Having exhausted currently available options on the painting score, I
went to install my scanner. After installing the software, I was able to
run it in standalone mode (I have an Epson Expression 1680) and scan
images just fine, but the scanner itself _never appeared_ in the File
-&gt; Import menu in Photoshop CS3.

From what I gather, either the scanner's TWAIN interface software and/or
associated utility application (EPSONScan) is not a universal binary
(CS3 runs natively on Intel Macs) and Epson lied about it (because it
says it IS a Universal, native Intel build).

Either way, I had reached a dead-end with CS3. Perhaps they will resolve
these issues in the future (and I'm addressing both Adobe and Epson
here). I'm really glad I didn't jump on that \$800 auction for CS3
Design Standard on eBay last week!

My solution was to go back to Photoshop CS2, which has thus far been
100% faster with everything, regardless of whether it's running natively
or emulated through Rosetta. I probably have eight cores running at
3.0GHz to thank for that, but I still wish that Adobe would get their
act together and fix this laggy drawing problem in CS3 so that those of
us who suffer with it can use their native (universal binary) version.
