---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Art Concepts in Photography, Part 2: Composition'
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 137
wordpress_url: /articles/2007/08/26/art-concepts-in-photography-part-2-composition/
date: '2007-08-26 17:31:25 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-08-26 21:31:25 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- art
- discussion
- inspiration
- design
- balance
- composition
- concepts
- convergence
- isolation
- scale
---

This article is part of a series. If you want, go back and
read [Art Concepts in Photography, Part I: Texture][part1].

[part1]: {% post_url 2007-08-02-art-concepts-in-photography-part-1-texture %}

I come from more of a fine art background; my parents both work in the arts and
photography for me is an extension of my involvement in art as a whole. By
talking about the fundamental concepts of art as they apply to photography I
hope to help you improve your work and also understand the works of others.

Because this is only the second part in my Art Concepts series, I want to study
the more general and fundamental stuff first. In the last episode, we looked at
texture. Texture is a fairly specific element, so today I thought I would take a
big step back and talk about _composition_.

When we say "composition," we refer not only to the relative locations of the
points of interest in a piece (which is the most discussed aspect), but also to
their sizes, shapes, colors, and other variables that contribute to the balance
(or imbalance) of the work. That's what we're going to look at today.~~MORE~~

## The Rule of Thirds

Photographers who are starting out and who begin exploring the generally
available advice for creating interesting images will swiftly come across the
_rule of thirds_. Most everyone who has spent any amount of time reading about
photography, or art in general, is sure to have heard about the rule of thirds.

The rule of thirds says that the points of interest in a composition are most
effectively placed at the intersections of a grid made up of two horizontal and
two vertical lines, each equidistant from one another and from the edges of the
piece.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-1.jpg)

More simply stated, the points of interest in the image ought to be roughly one
_third_ the total height or width of the image from any of its edges. This rule
was created to help beginners shake the desire to place their subject smack in
the center of the frame, which, generally speaking, is a boring thing to do.

As with all things in art, this rule can be broken. With experience, an artist
will find situations where a centered subject is very pleasing to the eye, but
not until he or she is aware of this rule can it be thoughtfully applied or
violated.

Coincidentally, this was also mentioned recently on the Digital Photography
School blog in a post entitled [Break the Rule of Thirds][btrt] You may want to
go read that to get an idea of why the rule of thirds can and should be broken
on occasion.

[btrt]: http://digital-photography-school.com/blog/break-the-rule-of-thirds/

## More Advanced Principles

The rule of thirds is a simplistic rule, and a useful one for teaching
composition fundamentals, but what I want to talk about are lesser-known
principles of design that will help you bring even greater control and
understanding to your compositions. These principles are:

* Balance (or weight)

* Scale 

* Isolation 

* Convergence

These principles are independent, though also related. You can think of them as
a visual design toolbox with each tool having a specific use but each specific
use being a necessary contributor to the final project. In this case, scale,
isolation, and convergence are helpful in managing the _emphasis_ in a piece,
which is another principle of design. Of course, your goal as an artist is to
communicate an idea or transmit an emotional response of some kind to your
audience. Art that fails to do this is of limited value; even stock and
documentary photography make use of these design concepts to communicate their
messages effectively.

## Balance

Compositional balance means maintaining a consistent "visual gravity" across the
expanse of a piece so that the eye is not drawn to one side more than the other
(for example). More often than not, exciting compositions are intentionally
imbalanced, and you may already be creating compositions like that without
knowing what fundamental principles you're invoking.

By means of demonstration, I will use some simple graphics to illustrate the
concept of balance. The reason I'm not using photographs to illustrate these
design concepts is because I want to be sure your understanding of them is as
"pure" as possible, and simple graphics allow me to single out these
concepts. In this first example, the image is very clearly imbalanced.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-2.gif)

Because the large, black dot is the only thing _in_ the image, you are forced to
look at it. Your eye does not want to hang around in that empty white space
because it just isn't interested in it. The feeling of having your eye drawn
more toward one thing than another is what we mean by _weight_. Balance is
achieved by placing elements of the same weight in roughly symmetrical areas of
the composition. Let's balance this composition out in the simplest way:

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-3.gif)

By placing an identical dot on the opposite side, we have achieved balance. Yes,
it's rather boring overall, but your eye happily moves back and forth between
the two dots, exploring the expanse of the image without undue distraction. Try
to get a feeling for what your eye gravitates toward. Try squinting, too (I'm
serious).

It can help to squint or tilt your head when evaluating more complex images to
get a feeling for the dynamics at play. Let's make things more interesting by
adding a different visual element to try to balance the first dot.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-4.gif)

Here, the dot is countered by a line. If you are already used to looking at
compositions and evaluating balance, or if you are very relaxed, you will notice
immediately that the dot is still pulling all the weight of this image. Even
though a visual element was placed on the opposite side of the piece, the dot
still has more _weight_ because it's larger and because it extends toward the
edges of the frame, asserting its dominance in a way.

To balance this composition, we'll have to add more.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-5.gif)

In this final example, you can see how much more visual weight the array of
lines carries. Your eye is drawn back and forth naturally and balance is
restored. The complexity of the lines overlapping one another makes them more
interesting to look at than the dot, which increases their weight. There are
several variables that contribute to visual weight in a composition and I want
to talk about three specific ones right now: scale, isolation, and convergence.

## Scale

Scale was really the star of the balance discussion above. As I said, there are
many ways of changing the balance of a piece. Scale is the simplest to
understand and control. Scale refers to the size of visual elements in relation
to one another and to the composition as a whole.

In a photograph, scale is modified through perspective--by moving closer to or
farther from an object. Keeping scale in mind when you compose your frame is
just another way to manipulate the balance and therefore the visceral effect
your image will have on its audience.

## Isolation

When elements stand out from their surroundings, it's called _isolation_. We can
manipulate isolation in a composition in a couple of ways. First, we can alter
the surroundings of an object, and second, we can change the relative scales of
the object and its surroundings.  Both will have an effect on how isolated an
element in the composition will appear to be.

The first example is exploring contrast between visual elements and their
surroundings.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-6.gif)

Notice how the first element is easily recognizable, though the second element
stands out much more strongly from its surroundings. We would say that the
second element is more _isolated_ than the first, which makes it a stronger
focal point in the composition.

The second example shown below explores the effect of scale.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-7.gif)

You will notice that both elements in this example draw your eye. The first is
quite large and occupies a significant area of the frame, which gives it
weight. The second is much smaller, yet your eye is drawn to it because of the
space _around_ it (the space around it is called _negative space_, which I'll
be talking about in much more depth later); because of its _isolation_.

Our minds process visual information spatially (though some people process what
they see more spatially than others; we call those people "right-brained"
because the right hemisphere of the brain is responsible for spatial
recognition). When we view an image, we are subconsciously comparing its parts
to what we know of the world, trying to recognize objects and relationships
between them. When presented with a shape surrounded by a field of color, our
mind creates a three-dimensional understanding of the space, visualizing the
shape as _sitting on_ a field of color. If two shapes are presented adjacent to
one another and they are of different sizes, our subconscious reaction is that
the larger shape is closer to us. Isolation works because our minds are so adept
at interpreting shapes and the space around them.

You could say that photography, and even art itself, is based on shapes and the
space around them.

## Convergence

Convergence could be called the _most obvious_ way to affect the emphasis of a
composition. Essentially, convergence describes elements that come together at a
point, though they don't have to touch in order to be convergent. Taking
advantage of the eye's fondness for following lines, convergence can cause the
viewer to trace a certain path through a composition.

Convergence can be executed very subtly in a photograph, but for the sake of
illustration I will use it boldly here.

![](/articles/DesignConcepts/PartII/Figure-8.gif)

Notice how your eye catches one of those lines at the left side and "rides" it
right up to the dot on the right. It's very natural to follow lines within a
composition and learning to recognize when and how that happens will help you to
strengthen yours. The dots are the same size, but the one on the right draws
more weight and attention because of the lines leading into it.

## The Final Project

We've really talked about a lot here today and I commend you if you've actually
read all the way through! After working on this post for nearly three weeks, I
finally had to come to terms with the fact that I could never make it as
complete as I'd like. I will try to include the parts I skimmed over or left out
in future additions to this series. Suffice it to say, art is a very big subject
to try to cover in a simple blog post.

Rather than post a bunch of photos here and try to describe what's happening in
them compositionally, I challenge you, my readers, to do so as you browse
through photos in the next few days. I imagine most of you look at photographs
daily, either yours or others', and I would be ecstatic to hear about how you've
applied these concepts to the creation of your own images or the critique of
others'.

If you leave a comment or shoot me an e-mail with your thoughts and reactions, I
will put together a "wrap-up" post sharing those ideas with everyone. If you're
looking for stuff to critique, feel free to hammer away
at [my gallery](http://gallery.aaronbieber.com)!

Other great sources include the amazing [PhotoSIG](http://www.photosig.com),
obviously [Flickr](http://www.flickr.com), and all of the amazing galleries
on [photo.net](http://photo.net/gallery/photocritique/filter.tcl?rank_by=folders.=7.)
I frequent these sites when I'm in need of inspiration.
