---
layout: post
title: "Stop Pixel Peeping!"
date: 2018-10-08T18:48:06-04:00
---

{% img drop right /assets/images/uploads/stop-pixel-peeping/pixel-peep.png %}

This is going to be a rant post, so if you're not into that, feel free to go on
your merry way and come back later after I've cooled down.

**Pix•el Peep•ing**, *n.*

1. Closely inspecting a digital image with the intent to dissect its every
   flaw---and flaws in the equipment it was created with---even if such flaws
   would be invisible to any normal human in nearly any natural situation.

This is not a new thing, but Photokina just happened, which invariably sets off
an avalanche of reviews and teardowns and intense analysis, and I'm not saying
that that sort of work is completely without value, but, really, for the sake of
the rest of us, just quit it. ~~MORE~~

As enthusiasts, or even as professionals, I know it's fun to follow along with
what the manufacturers are doing and get into spirited and good-natured debates
with our friends who use different systems about why ours is the better choice
for shooting X, or why theirs is terrible at Y, and even to spend a good deal of
time on DxOMark and DPReview literally agonizing over every detail about a piece
of equipment.

But seriously folks, these days, you literally can't buy a *bad* camera. Instead
of nit-picking and bickering and over-analyzing, here is something you could be
doing instead: making photographs.

Cameras are so damn good these days that you probably have an altogether
serviceable unit *in your pocket right now*, and I'm not trying to say that you
should just sell all your gear and use an iPhone to fill your portfolio or
anything, but seriously, the *actual* full-body cameras on the market today are
all so great that if you aren't satisfied with the images you're getting out of
them, you should take a step back and think about whether it's the equipment
that's the problem.

**Experience is your creative fuel.** The only way to make your images truly
astounding, truly timeless, is to gain experience. Your experience is always
growing, always changing, and armed with an observant mind your work will
improve many times faster through experimentation than through upgrades to your
kit.

{% img drop center /assets/images/uploads/stop-pixel-peeping/good-morning-brookline.jpg %}

(The photo above was taken with my cell phone. I like it a lot. I'm not
convinced that the image would have *more merit* if it were 40 megapixels in
size.)

But hey, there's good news. Experience is basically free. Compared to that new
$3,000 mirrorless system (or whatever), experience only costs you some time and
some energy, and you were going to spend those anyway. Do you own a camera with
independent shutter speed, aperture, and ISO settings? Do you know how to change
them? Excellent, you already own the perfect camera.

Now, I know, if you're quite advanced or specialized in some area of
photography, like say you're a professional sports shooter, or you're a very
avid astrophotographer, you're going to have needs above and beyond "the manual
camera I happen to have in my lap." I get that. My point isn't that you don't
deserve the right gear, my point is that most people already own the right gear
but they love to obsess over what gear they **think** they should have instead
of putting a little elbow grease into their craft.

So don't be like those people. Read your actual camera manual. Watch some
YouTube videos about composition or technique. Go take a photography workshop!
Do something to expand your mind and your skills. You'll know when you need to
change your equipment, and it won't be because DxOMark said so.

That's my rant. But here is more:

* Read [Your Photos Need More Life and Less Photoshop][morelife]
* Watch [Fro Knows Photo's State of the Union clip from 7.5 minutes in][fro],
  which inspired a lot of this state of mind I got myself into.

And hey, I'm going to be teaching photography workshops in Boston starting next
spring (2019). I'd love to have you along, so if you're interested in that sort
of thing you can read about the workshops and sign up to be notified of early
registration before *anyone else* on my workshop website,
[ArtPhotoWorkshops][apw].

[morelife]: https://fstoppers.com/originals/your-photos-need-more-life-and-less-photoshop-290111
[fro]: https://youtu.be/AkTYdhLmn8Q?t=455
[apw]: https://www.artphotoworkshops.com
