---
layout: post
title: "Why I Shoot Sony"
date: 2018-10-28T08:47:35-04:00
---

{% img right /assets/images/uploads/why-i-shoot-sony/a7riii-kit.jpg %}

At the risk of appearing to be one of those gear-obsessed photographers who
enjoys *playing with cameras* more than *making photographs*, I'm going to take
this one post to talk about why I switched to Sony and why I don't regret it at
all.

This isn't going to be an thoroughly researched analysis of the photography
equipment landscape; if you're interested in something like that you may be
better off reading PetaPixel or DPreview. Rather, I think it's useful to hear
why a photographer chooses a particular kit, and I also think this is a
convenient moment in time to talk about why I gave up a full DSLR setup to
switch to mirrorless.

I'll also try to convince you to switch to mirrorless, too.

So if any of that sounds interesting, here we go.~~MORE~~

First of all, in case you missed the memo, mirrorless is the future. You may
disagree with it, but in about five years from now we'll all be shooting
mirrorless cameras, so just prepare yourself for that. But it's not all bad, you
know, there are tons of advantages to mirrorless cameras, and I'll talk a little
bit about those later on.

So why do I think that mirrorless is the future? Well, first, the market says
so: Sony sold more full-frame cameras in the US than any other maker in the
first half of 2018 (in dollars and units sold), and has held the number one
position on sales of mirrorless cameras *period* for *six years*. The popularity
of Sony's Alpha series of cameras against even the respected and capable Canon
and Nikon is very telling.

At the same moment that Sony is showing up to Photokina (the largest photography
trade show) with essentially nothing new to announce (just a few new lenses,
which is the Photokina equivalent of no news) as if to say "our work here is
done," Canon and Nikon are parading around their brand new mirrorless bodies,
the EOS-R and Z7, respectively.

These are pretty good indications of where the market is headed, whether anyone
likes it or not, but I will say that from where I'm sitting I like it a lot.

I sold off all of my Canon gear and switched to a Sony mirrorless camera a few
years ago, but I can't say that I did it based on a calculated market analysis
or even any external signals at all. My motivation was simple: I wanted to stop
carrying around 15+ pounds of metal and glass.

I shed all that Canon equipment and bought the Sony NEX-7; such a tiny little
camera, it boggled my mind that it could take such fabulous pictures. I used it
very seriously for a couple of years through many adventures (including my
second trip to Yellowstone), eventually stepped up to the Alpha a7 II, and
finally the Alpha a7R III.

So what's the big deal? Why mirrorless? Why Sony? Why should you think about
selling that DSLR that has performed so well for you for so long?

The main reason that I love mirrorless is the same reason I was leery of it at
first: the electronic viewfinder. The electronic viewfinder, or EVF, is just the
small LCD screen inside the eyepiece that you are looking at instead of a prism
and mirror combination.

Early on, EVFs weren't that great. Resolution was poor and a low refresh rate
meant that everything felt more artificial and distant when composing your
shot. Nowadays, though, EVFs are nearly indistinguishable from an optical
image. The EVF in the a7R III is 3.6 million dots, or 3.6 megapixels if you
prefer. The new EOS-R and Z7 both sport 3.7 megapixel EVFs, which is the best
you can get right now save for this crazy Leica SL "Typ 601" that has a whopping
4.4 megapixel EVF.

My point is, an optical viewfinder (or OVF) is not really giving you any *more*
image data than an EVF does in today's world. But the real killer feature of the
EVF is not that "it's as good as a mirror," it's that an EVF is a full LCD
screen.

{% img drop right /assets/images/uploads/why-i-shoot-sony/nikon-focus-points.jpg © Nikon %}

When you look through an OVF, you can see focus points light up, and you
generally get readouts on your basic settings (shutter speed, aperture, exposure
value, and sometimes ISO or a couple other things). The way focus points are lit
up is through actual trickery of lights and glass and whatnot and those elements
that illuminate are fixed, they're built into the optical system.

With an EVF, well, it's a screen, it can display whatever you want. You can see
more settings, more overlayed data. Histograms, focus peaking, composition
grids, or even a level for making sure your shot is perfectly horizontal. On top
of the overlayed data, you can also see a representation of what your image will
look like given your current exposure settings, and now we're getting into the
true value of this system.

{% img drop left /assets/images/uploads/why-i-shoot-sony/a7riii-viewfinder.jpg © Manny Ortiz %}

No longer do you need to learn to read the tea leaves of the light meter and EV
scale and then chimp endlessly, swapping from viewfinder to back display to make
sure you got the right exposure. Just hold the shutter button halfway down and
bam, right there in the viewfinder, you will see what it's going to look
like. Not sure if that one bright area of the sky is overexposed? No problem,
turn on "zebra lines" and there's no missing it.

After shooting mirrorless for years, I've gotten so used to this wealth of data
flowing into my eyeballs that I don't think I could ever go back to that simple
mirror and prism setup.

Of course, there is an element of romance that is ripped away when you add more
electronics and more complexity to a thing, and I can understand that. I mean, I
have friends who shoot film, and for some, nothing can replace that authentic
feeling. But my goal is to capture the image that I see in my mind and I want to
use the tools that help me to get there as easily and painlessly as possible, so
it's less about the experience of shooting and more about the final product that
drives my equipment decisions.

If you ask me, mirrorless is simply the best option available today for
realizing your creative goals. It gives you, the creator, the most direct view
of how the thing that you are seeing with your eyes will be converted into the
image that you can ultimately share.

So that's why I shoot Sony. Maybe in a few years, Canon and Nikon will catch
up. Some say Fuji is already ahead in a couple different ways, and those
arguments are very credible. I may change systems again when the time is right,
but for my money, Sony is the way to go right now and probably will be for the
next few years.

Got questions? Criticisms? Did I miss something? Leave a comment below!
