---
layout: post
title: "Change Your Perspective"
date: 2018-10-10T18:50:03-04:00
---

I saw this post the other day on DigitalRev talking about something called the
"long lens challenge," which was targeted at landscape photographers. The basic
idea is to force yourself to use a long lens rather than a wide lens, even when
the shot you really want is a wide one. The goal of the challenge is simple:
force creativity.

After reading it, I wanted to give everyone here a similar but even more
aggressive challenge: **you should do this all the time**.

I don't mean only shoot with long lenses, that's ridiculous, but you should
constantly *make yourself uncomfortable* in search of creative
breakthroughs. Here I'll share why I think this is critically important, and
give you a few quick things you can do **today** to reach the next level in your
work.~~MORE~~

[I wrote about this a while back][creativity] (okay it was 11 years ago; time
flies when you're having fun) and to be completely honest I'm going to say a lot
of the same things again, but they're all still true.

[creativity]: {% post_url 2007-05-23-boosting-creativity-enhancing-composition %}

> The enemy of art is the absence of limitations.
>
> ---Orson Welles

Let's get this one caveat out of the way: if you're working on commission or
satisfying a specific stock photography need, none of this will apply to that
specific shoot. You should obviously go get the image you need, sell it, and
move on.

I'm an art photographer; I don't shoot stock, I don't shoot on commission
(yet?). I capture images that are visually exciting or meaningful to me in some
way and I hope that other people will appreciate them, too. Whether you are an
art photographer or a photog for hire, though, these tips will help you move the
boundaries of your creative thinking in useful ways.

So maybe don't apply these tips during a paid shoot, but going out for a day and
playing with these ideas may help bring a new element of surprise to your next
paid shoot, or, in my case, help me see things in a new way.

## Why is this important?

Why is it important to feel uncomfortable? Because nobody ever created anything
truly breathtaking from their comfort zone. The images that leave a lasting
impression are the ones that are unexpected, surprising, unusual. Those images
are created by photographers bending the rules, trying new things, and probably
feeling just a little bit anxious about it the entire time.

These are the standard tips that I generally give people searching for a little
creative jump start.

## Look down

The first couple of tips here are obvious, but bear repeating. I taught a
workshop in Chicago, and while walking around the city it's easy to spend most
of your time looking straight or up; the city stretches into the sky and many of
its most iconic features are up there.

I happened to be watching the street as I walked and spotted this construction
cone. The cone by itself wouldn't be very interesting, nor the sewer grate, but
all together with the reflection of the building across the road, I think, makes
for an interesting composition.

{% img modest drop /assets/images/uploads/change-your-perspective/downward-upward.jpg "Downward, Upward" %}

I never would have seen this if I had been focusing my attention on the
buildings themselves. Try forcing yourself to only shoot things below the
horizon line. See what you observe that you wouldn't have seen before.

## Look up

Of course, as I said above, in city surroundings you're likely to be looking up
a fair bit anyway, but don't forget this tip in other situations as well.

I captured this image while walking to work one morning across Boston's Copley
Square. On the right is the former John Hancock tower, now known simply by its
address, 300 Clarendon Street. What makes this image interesting to me is the
focus on the birds and the texture of the clouds with just a little reminder
that this is a city (or even that it's Boston, if you're very familiar with that
particular building).

{% img modest drop /assets/images/uploads/change-your-perspective/300-clarendon-birds.jpg "300 Clarendon Birds" %}

The point I'm trying to make is that I was walking to work; I wasn't actively
out on a photo shoot trying to make art. I look all around me all the time,
seeking those moments and those opportunities. I took this photo with my cell
phone, because it was the only camera I had on hand. I like this image a lot.

Try limiting yourself to shooting only *straight up*. Go into that library or
church and see what their ceilings look like. Shoot straight up the side of a
lamp post, tree, building, or whatever you can find.

## Get low

Exercising those creative muscles will make them lean and strong and then you'll
start to see exciting things around you all the time. An easy one that many
instructors use is to get lower.

I love trying shots from down low, to see if I can get a more unique foreground
or a perspective not usually seen.

{% img modest drop /assets/images/uploads/change-your-perspective/yellowstone-lake.jpg "Yellowstone Lake" %} 

This one is from Yellowstone National Park. The day was beautiful, but not the
best for landscapes. Still, the clouds were very interesting. At this time of
day, the lake is just not very attractive, but by getting down low I was able to
minimize the size of the boring lake in the frame and bring a cool driftwood
subject in front of the awesome sky.

## Make up your own challenges

The important part of challenging yourself creatively like this is removing some
of the freedom you normally enjoy. Imposing these invented limitations creates a
situation where you have to think harder, look harder, and build up your
adaptation reflexes.

You can make up your own challenges! Here are a few other ideas to get you
started:

* Use only a specialty prime lens, like a macro or fisheye, regardless of
  location or subject
* Shoot only in portrait orientation, or only in landscape orientation
* Set your camera to single point autofocus and move the focus point somewhere
  other than the center of the frame

Nearly any limitation will get your eyes and your brain working together in new
ways.

Did you try any of these? Have other ideas? Please share with me in the comments
down below!

Also see:

* [The DigitalRev "Long Lens Challenge"](https://www.digitalrev.com/article/why-every-landscape-photographer-should-take-the-long-lens-challenge)
