---
layout: post
title: "What a Week of Selfies Taught Me About Photography"
date: 2018-09-16T11:57:19-04:00
---

{% img drop /assets/images/uploads/week-of-selfies/selfie6.jpg %}

For a long time I've wanted a somewhat better self portrait photo to use on
various accounts and websites. I've been using the same old boring picture of me
standing in front of a blank wall for ages---three or four years, probably.

Since I had, at around the same moment in time, reluctantly caved to the
pressures of modern society and signed back up for [Instagram][insta], I figured
I could make this into a bit of a challenge for myself. What if I took a selfie
every day for a week? I mean, not exactly one, but at least one. Every day. For
a week.

[insta]: https://www.instagram.com/aaronbieber

So I did. Not only did I end up replacing my boring old photo with an *awesome
new one* on most of my accounts, but I learned a **critical photography skill**
that everyone, new or old to the craft, should live by.

I think anyone who does creative work can benefit from this advice, so I'm
writing it down here on the internet.~~MORE~~

But I learned a lot more, too.

Another thing I learned is that Instagram is approximately as addictive as
everyone has been telling me. It's confusing that there are two ways to add new
posts, either by tapping the "+" button in the bottom navigation panel or by
"swiping right" or tapping the camera icon in the upper left, but once you start
playing with the fully featured post creator function (that's the second one, in
case you are like me and didn't know), it's the social media equivalent of
Colombian black tar heroin straight into your veins.

Below you can see eight of the photos I took. Pretty much all of them are
post-processed in some way, usually by applying a stock Instagram filter or by
making adjustments manually, but sometimes I will edit in Snapseed (my favorite
mobile photo editor at the moment).

{% img center /assets/images/uploads/week-of-selfies/selfie-film-strip.jpg %}

As time went on, I got a little more adventurous with the photo effects. This
isn't the best progression to be able to visualize it, but the very first photo
has nearly no changes made. The second, I did some contrast work. The third uses
Google's "photo blur" (their response to the iPhone "portrait mode"), the fourth
uses more filters and color tone adjustments, and so on.

Finally you get to the eighth photo, which has definitely been touched by
Snapseed, and I feel like I have reached a pinnacle of location, pose, lighting,
and processing.

And this is a photo taken **on my cell phone**. For the record, I'm still using
a Google Pixel. The first one. The camera on this phone is *absurdly good*, and
post-processing software has reached new heights for sure.

Now, something you have to know about me before I talk about the foundational,
life-changing skill that I learned through this process: **I am my least favorite
photographic subject.**

I am not that dude running around taking selfies at every location or event,
I've never owned a "selfie stick," I don't vlog or do any YouTube stuff, I don't
even own a camera whose screen turns around so you can see it while you're
looking into the lens.

That alone made this more of a challenge for me. It's hard for me to see beyond
my own insecurities to honestly evaluate an image and critique it and learn from
it. But I forced myself to do it.

What I found was that each day, when I remembered that I owed myself a photo for
this challenge, I would open up Instagram or the Google Camera and point it at
myself and see what happened. And each time, it got a little bit easier.

So this is maybe a little trite and maybe a little obvious, but I decided to
repeatedly do a thing that I knew I was not great at, and didn't even like, and
just through that repetition, I got better at it. I even came to enjoy it a bit
more, though I'm still my least favorite subject.

If there is something you want to get better at, or something that scares you
but you think it's maybe a little bit silly and you wish it didn't... Try doing
that thing every single day for one week.

Have you already done this? Do you think it's a decent idea? Or a stupid one?
Leave me a comment down below.
