---
layout: post
title: "How I Use Sony Camera Settings Memory"
date: 2019-01-19T11:19:31-05:00
---

{% img right drop /assets/images/uploads/camera-settings-memory/a7riii-mode-dial.jpg %}

I *really like* the camera settings memory that my Sony a7RIII offers. Referred
to in their documentation as "Camera Settings 1" and "Camera Settings 2," this
feature has saved me from mistakes more than once, so I want to tell you how it
works and how I use it.

If you shoot with a Sony Alpha camera (a6000, a6500, a7II, a7III, a9), you
probably have this feature. If you aren't using it, allow me to tell you why you
*should!* ~~MORE~~

## What Is Settings Recall?

Settings Recall (or "Settings Memory") is a feature in some (most?) Sony Alpha
cameras that allows you to save camera settings and later recall them, as the
name might imply.

From the Sony "Help Guide":

> Allows you to register up to 3 often-used modes or product settings to the
> product and up to 4 (M1 through M4) to the memory card. You can recall the
> settings using just the mode dial.

There are two available "banks" of settings memory: in-camera memory and SD card
storage. The saved settings "slots" are generally referred to as C1-C3, and the
SD card settings "slots" are M1-M4.

In this article, I will *only* talk about C1-C3, because I haven't yet figured
out a reasonable use for saving camera settings onto an SD card. This might be
useful to you if you have multiple Sony cameras whose settings recall are
compatible, or if you have some other reason to "back up" some settings
somewhere.

Note that if you format the SD card, the settings *will* be erased.

## Why Is Settings Recall Awesome?

As you likely know by now, I shoot mostly landscape, cityscape, and
architectural subjects. You may also know that photography is a serious hobby
for me, but not my full-time gig. Yes, that's right, I have a "normal job;" I'm
not a full-time blogger and social media maven.

Because I shoot more occasionally, it's easy for me to fall into the excitement
of the moment when heading out to do some shooting, and forgetting that I left
some camera setting at an unusual value. For example, I might go out for some
city shooting during the day and not remember that I was previously out after
dark shooting handheld at ISO 2,000.

**Okay, I admit it**, I should definitely work on becoming more disciplined
about checking all of my settings, that's kind of table stakes for being a
photographer, right? Sure, but even if I do remember to check every important
setting, it's still annoying to change a bunch of them before I can get started
with a shoot.

So for me, settings recall serves two purposes:

1. It rescues me from being occasionally forgetful, and
2. It makes it simple and fast to get back to a "baseline" of settings.

Great, so how does this all work? How do I use this to make **my** life easier?

## How I Use Settings Recall

Right now, I use C1 and C2 to store my most frequently used "base settings" for
the two shooting situations that I usually find myself in. For any other
scenario, I "build" off of one of these two sets of settings.

### Settings 1, "C1"

These are my essential, everyday, general handheld shooting settings.

{% img center drop /assets/images/uploads/camera-settings-memory/settings-c1.png %}

As a basis, I love *aperture priority mode*, and then I have a pretty no-frills
set of baseline settings:

* f/8
* ISO 100
* Single-shot drive mode
* Single-shot AF
* Center point AF

You can store much more than just basic shooting settings, though. In addition
to these, I prefer a histogram and square grid overlay on my display, and it
will reset many of the other settings I infrequently change, such as touch
panel+pad (how the touch screen functions), and more.

### Settings 2, "C2"

My second group of settings is geared toward sunrise/sunset tripod shooting,
especially when I'm doing cityscapes and I want to get a lot of dynamic range
out of an image with city lights and ambient light playing together.

{% img center drop /assets/images/uploads/camera-settings-memory/settings-c2.png %}

Again, I prefer *aperture priority mode*, and then I have settings oriented
toward tripod shooting:

* f/8
* ISO 64
* Single bracket (non-continuous), 1.0 EV stops, 5 shots
* Single-shot AF
* Center point AF

Similar to C1, I also select a specific display mode, in this case I like the
display with the digital level, because it's important to take a level shot for
landscape and cityscape images (generally).

As you'll notice, the settings are fairly similar between C1 and C2; I almost
always use *aperture priority mode* unless I'm shooting with a manual lens like
my Voigtlander Nokton Classic 50mm f/1.4, or my Venus Optics Laowa 14mm f/2.8
Zero-D; In those cases I shoot in *manual mode*, of course. I may alter the AF
point setting in C2 because I find that I often change it to "flexible spot,"
but for now it's set to center point.

What this helps me do, more than anything else, is take what would be
potentially a whole bunch of dial rotations and menu selections and turn it into
one mode dial rotation and one press of the "select" button.

In less than five seconds, I am set up with my preferred settings for these two
common situations that I find myself in. For this reason, I love Camera Settings
Memory.

## Why I Don't Love Camera Settings Memory

There are reasons I think this system is flawed, and I suppose in any situation
as complex as this one, a "perfect" solution may not exist. Certainly there may
not be a single solution that satisfies *everyone*, but I think my observations
here are not eccentric.

### #1. Mixing physical and virtual settings is hard

I guess it's cool that C1-C3 are on the physical mode dial. It's also kind of
confusing in a way. On the one hand, the **mode** is a setting that you can
save, so it would be strange for the camera's current mode to be different than
the mode selected on the dial. For that reason, you need somewhere for the dial
to sit when it *could be* P, A, S, or M.

Still, it always felt a little bit weird to me. When you rotate the dial onto
the "1," "2," or "3," it triggers an on-screen display of the saved settings
(well, some of them), and prompts you to accept the settings ("Enter"), or
select one of the other saved slots (the M1-M4 slots, only).

Of course, you don't need to press "Enter" to apply the settings. They are
already applied. If you depress the shutter, the screen returns to your shooting
display and the settings are there, as you wanted. This is the main, recommended
method (based on my reading of the Help Guide) to apply settings M1-M4. So
again, your mode dial may be sitting on "1," but you may be using settings
retrieved from M2. You just have to know that.

Your actual mode, of course, will be whichever mode you saved to that setting
slot. If you want the settings saved in C1, but with a different mode... Well,
you can't do that.

This odd combination of changing a mode with the physical dial and triggering a
software interaction feels slightly off to me, but, this is the most trivial of
my complaints.

### #2. What is saved is... Hard to know

My biggest gripe with the system is that you can't really know what is saved in
one of these settings slots. It's a **lot** of stuff, but I'm fairly certain
that it doesn't save **every possible setting**. So which settings does it save?
I guess you'll have to experiment to find out if the one you want to save
actually gets saved.

I imagine a world where the menu system displays some tiny marker indicating
whether the setting *could* be saved, or, even better, whether the setting is
*currently set* to the value saved in the selected setting slot.

And then, again, because the dial can be used to recall settings saved on your
SD card, there is also the possibility that the current settings were retrieved
from somewhere other than the slot shown on the physical dial. I think Sony has
to rethink this part of the interface entirely.

### #3. The mode dial is kind of a mystery, seriously

Maybe this should have gone in #1, but I'm calling it out separately because
to me it's the most unintuitive aspect of this physical/virtual control scheme.

The mode dial on just about every other camera till now, most of which have been
real, physical dials on DSLRs since the beginning, have selected the mode.
That's all. If you set it to "A," you change the camera to aperture priority
mode, and that's it.

On these Sony Alpha cameras, because the C1-C3 dial positions recall a mountain
of saved settings, they've overloaded the function of the other mode settings to
*also* save settings, kind of.

I say "kind of," because you aren't choosing to save them, the camera is
"remembering" what you had set when you were last in one of the traditional
shooting modes.

Now, this makes sense in some cases, because you may not want all of the saved
settings recalled from C1-C3 to persist when you change back to one of the
traditional modes, and I suppose this is what Sony learned in their focus groups
or decided on their own.

Where it gets fuzzy for me is that you have, effectively, *four* settings
conditions. One of the recalled settings from C1-C3, and the settings implicitly
saved for the traditional modes.

Whereas with a simpler DSLR, all of the settings you select simply stay the same
until you change them, moving from one of the C1-C3 modes to a traditional mode
will *reset* all of the settings (including all of the ones deep in the menus
that you can't readily see) to what they were the last time you used one
of the traditional modes. Those settings *do* carry through between each of the
traditional modes, though.

For example, if you change your ISO to 400 while in "A," it will stay the same
when you change to "S," but if you recall C1, which sets your ISO to 100, change
your ISO to 200, and then change back to "S," the ISO will return to 400 as you
selected while in "A" at the start.

This, for me, feels just ever so slightly incongruous. You just have to keep in
mind that the "M," "S," "A," and "P" modes *share settings* and *implicitly
remember them*.

Most of the time it isn't a big deal, but if you're frequently recalling
settings and changing modes, you'll want to keep a keen eye on your important
shooting settings.

## Conclusions

Here we discussed how Camera Settings Memory works on the Sony Alpha line of
cameras, and why I think it is a *game changer* for someone as forgetful as I
am, who frequently shoots in two common scenarios with different basic settings
requirements.

I really think that this feature is a "killer app" that other cameras are
missing out on. Especially in this world where our cameras have in excess of 100
configurable settings (the a7RIII has **180 top-level settings entries**, some
of which lead to sub-menus), being able to meticulously pre-configure them the
way you like and recall them in a couple of seconds is **absolutely killer**.

What do you think? Do you use this? Do you hate this? Please comment below!
