---
title: "Can You Learn Photography With a Smartphone?"
date: 2020-02-12T15:55:08-05:00
draft: true
---

You absolutely can.

If you have *any device* that can capture an image of what’s in front of you,
and with which you have at least some control over the composition, focus, and
exposure, you sure as hell can learn photography with it. In fact, if your
device is a smartphone, it even has some unique *advantages* over other kinds of
cameras, which I will dive into today.

It is no secret at this point that today’s smartphones are capable of taking
amazing photographs, but the question I want to really dig into is *can learning
photography with a smartphone be an on-ramp for more "serious" photography*? To
be clear, I believe that answer is also "Yes.”

<!--more-->

If you’ve been thinking about getting into photography, well, first of all,
welcome to my photography blog! But also, I hope you’ll find this article useful
as you think about how to start or improve your photography practice.

## First, some definitions

When I say "learn photography,” I definitely don’t mean “learn how to be a
world-renowned studio photographer.” Studio, real estate, automotive, and
product photography are all examples of areas of the craft that are particularly
technical, and where your competitors will pressure you to use more specialized
tools and techniques. That isn’t to say that you can’t take really nice product
photos with a smartphone, but there are limits, so just keep that in mind as you
read.

In defense of my position, though, Lee Morris from Fstoppers did a [bikini shoot
with an iPhone 6S](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nT6eaBm82bQ) and some cheap
accessories like reflectors, a fan, and a flashlight, and proved rather
definitively that it can be done well. The reason it worked? Experience and
skill behind the camera, composing the shot, directing assistants to configure
lighting, directing the model to pose well. So even this is possible, but set
your sights realistically.

When I say "smartphone," I mean a phone made in the last handful of years, with
special preference to the iPhone (yes, just about any iPhone), and the Google
Pixel line of phones. Among all smartphones in the last bunch of years, those
two have had consistently great cameras. You will probably do fine with most
other recent phones, but it’s worth mentioning that not all are created equal.

## Don't believe me?

Apple famously ran a huge marketing campaign built on the quality of the iPhone
camera, posting up giant ads featuring images taken with an iPhone. Some were
produced by pros, controlling every other possible variable, but it certainly
showed that a smartphone photograph can be stunning.

{{< img "center drop" "/images/uploads/smartphone/shot-on-iphone-billboard.jpg" "Courtesy of Daily Billboard" >}}

For a while, I was challenging myself to take photos with my own smartphone on
my morning commutes to work, back when I lived on public transit and the commute
involved a lot of "being out in the world." Here are a couple of my favorites
from that period:

{{< img "drop modest" "/images/uploads/smartphone/04Jan17-01.jpg" "John Hancock Birds" >}}

{{< img "drop modest" "/images/uploads/smartphone/30Oct17-01.jpg" "Fairmont Flag" >}}

View these and many more, much larger, in my [Good
Morning](https://gallery.aaronbieber.com/Galleries/Good-Morning/) gallery.

Hopefully this is convincing evidence that a smartphone is "good enough" to make
compelling images, so it should be more than good enough to learn some of the
fundamentals of photography.

## Where to begin

So you have a smartphone and you want to improve your photography "chops."
Excellent! While there is a ton to learn about how to manipulate the world and
your equipment to get the effect that you want, all the real work starts inside
your head. 

The equipment in your hand is useless without knowledge and a vision in your
mind. To convert a vision into something compelling, you can apply basic art
concepts. Or, going in reverse, art concepts can guide you toward the creation
of a new vision.

To learn some of the basics of art, you can begin by reading my three-part
series, Art Concepts in Photography, which I posted on this blog some 13 years
ago:

* Part 1: [Texture][texture]
* Part 2: [Composition][composition]
* Part 3: [Positive/Negative Space][posneg]

[texture]: {{< ref "2007-08-02-art-concepts-in-photography-part-1-texture" >}}
[composition]: {{< ref "2007-08-26-art-concepts-in-photography-part-2-composition" >}}
[posneg]: {{< ref "2007-09-08-art-concepts-in-photography-part-3-positivenegative-space" >}}

