---
title: "Doubling Down"
date: 2022-07-18T13:07:17-04:00
---

My last post, which was now over a year ago, explored how I took my own advice
and doubled down on my "chosen style." The concrete outcome of that decision was
a reformat of my [gallery home page](https://gallery.aaronbieber.com).

So, it's been a year, and the gallery is still the same... Has anything else
changed? Absolutely! I'm a photographic hipster now.<!--more-->

As a refresher, here's a taste of four pieces from the front page of my gallery
site, which I think pretty accurately represents what I'm finding most
interesting in my photography right now.

{{< img "center" "/images/uploads/doubling-down/gallery-grid.png" "This is what I'm into now" >}}

Though changing the gallery homepage to showcase these pieces was a discrete and
deliberate act, this style of mine has been evolving for years, and in fact the
images on that page were taken with at least four different cameras.

Which brings me to the *photographic hipster* part of the story, which is where
Aaron sells his entire Sony Alpha a7R III kit and admits that he's a full-time
Fujifilm shooter now.

I bought the Fuji X-T4 right around the time I wrote that last post about
[leaning into a style]({{< ref "finding-my-style" >}}), and over the last year I
shot less and less with the Sony.

When people talk about how much *fun* it is to shoot one of these Fuji X
cameras, they are not making shit up, I really enjoy it. But in fairness, it
isn't just the camera that is fun for me, it is also leaning *hard* into manual
focus lenses, and especially rangefinder lenses.

{{< img "center drop" "/images/uploads/doubling-down/fuji-kit.jpg" "My Fuji X-T4 kit" >}}

My favorite lens right now is the Voigtlander Nokton Classic 40mm f/1.4
(pictured above).

The [history of the Voigtlander
company](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voigtl%C3%A4nder) is fairly interesting,
but the TL; DR is that it was founded in 1756 and was fully defunct
by 1972. Since 1999, the Japanese company Cosina has been manufacturing these
"modern" Voigtlander lenses.

This particular lens is only $400 on B&H as I write this. It uses a Leica M
mount, for which there is an adapter ring for just about every major camera
body.

Since the X-T4 is a crop sensor, this lens behaves more like a 60mm, and for the
work I've been doing, that seems like a nice fit for me.

I started visiting college campuses because they often have cool architecture
and nobody minds if you walk around taking photos there in the summer. The one
below is from Babson College. I like how the little triangle of grass, the
column, and the column's shadow breaks up the ground space.

{{< img "center drop" "/images/uploads/doubling-down/30Jun22-01.jpg" "Column I" >}}

We took a family trip out to the Berkshires this summer and visited Clark Art
Institute (which has an immense campus with public hiking trails, I highly
recommend it). There, I took the one below, which features the unique concrete
designs of architect Tadao Ando.

{{< img "center drop" "/images/uploads/doubling-down/09Jul22-01.jpg" "Ando" >}}

On one afternoon walk around Wellesley College (also a must-see publicly
accessible campus) I captured this amazing little slice of sunlight.

{{< img "center drop" "/images/uploads/doubling-down/24Jun22-01.jpg" "Lightblade" >}}

All three of these were shot with the Nokton Classic 40mm f/1.4, probably at
somewhere in the range of f/11 to f/16 (but who could know, manual lenses don't
save any metadata!)

## You Shoot What You Shoot

Years ago, on a photo trip to some gorgeous western national park, we ran into a
guy who memorably quipped that "you shoot what you shoot." I think he meant it
in a dismissive, fatalistic sort of way, but it stuck with me for all these
years. I do believe that on any creative journey, you can never *really* know
where you're going, you can only know where you are.

While I don't believe that I'll **never** post another color photo, or a photo of a
person, or a landscape, I feel really good about making this kind of work. These
latest few images I've posted feel more like "me" than any of the landscapes or
portraits I've ever done.

Not only are the images themselves exciting to me, but actually *making them*
feels fun. Gone are the days of setting up a tripod (or two) and standing
motionless for an hour while the sun rises or sets, usually in the cold.

And who wants to spend their "free time" doing something that is uncomfortable
or boring? Certainly not me.

I'd love to hear about your own style journey, and feel free to post your
gallery links, too!
