---
title: "What's Wrong With Peter's New Leica?"
date: 2022-08-09T15:26:36-04:00
---

In May, Peter McKinnon posted a video called "[Finally Switching Cameras - Leica
Q2][leica]." It's a cool video, you should definitely give it a watch. In case
you have somehow evaded any video or Instagram post by Peter McKinnon, he's a
photographer and videographer in Canada with over ten million YouTube
subscribers.

[leica]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mm2N8tOJSx0

I generally like Peter McKinnon, and I have nothing against Leica, either.

But this video... It kind of irked me, and I wanted to write about it, because
writing is how I think.

So what's wrong with Peter's new Leica?<!--more-->

{{< dots >}}

The basic premise of the video is that Peter has shot with essentially the same
kit for something like decades. He's traveled the world and created some
remarkable stuff with that kit. He says that in his photography, "I very rarely
venture outside my walls."

For that reason, he was inspired to try something very different, which brings
him to a Leica boutique in Italy where he plays with, and ultimately buys, a
Leica Q2 Reporter Edition.

As a huge fan of novelty myself, I can appreciate how using new equipment can
breathe new life into the creative process. I recently got [really into manual
rangefinder lenses]({{< ref "doubling-down" >}}), and I had an older Sony
mirrorless camera converted to infrared (more on that in a future post), so I
get it, I like to switch it up, too.

I think what bothers me about this video isn't the message that new tools
inspire new ideas. I fully agree with that message, and have experienced it many
times myself. I think what bothers me is the *genre* of the thing.

## You Just Starred in a Success Porn

Ever since people started getting famous on YouTube---and I really think YouTube
itself *created* this phenomenon---there is an apparent appetite for what I'm
going to call "success porn."

This is basically a "vlog" (or "video blog"), which is the motion picture
equivalent of a personal account of events from someone's own life, whose
content *conspicuously* features what the vlogger's lifestyle is like thanks to
their success as a content creator.

To a substantial degree, it's impossible for any successful content creator to
*avoid* starring in success porn. If your persona is genuine and you get
increasingly successful and have sponsors throwing money and products at you to
use and talk about, your content naturally skews toward showcasing luxury.

Thanks to the unstoppable speed and force of the *content treadmill* that every
creator is fated to ride, new stories must always be told and new experiences
must always be shared. To stop is to die.

So when you, a globally famous and well-funded YouTube celebrity, feel the need
to break free from your monotony, and the solution you choose is in the top 7%
most expensive cameras listed on B&H's website... Ta-daa, you just produced a
success porn.

## More Power to You, Peter

In reality, Peter McKinnon is sort of a rags-to-riches story, and he deserves
all of the benefits of his hard work over many years, and I can't hold any of
that against him, and I don't! This is not me saying "Peter, you should have
just bought a Fuji X-T4!" even if, maybe, that could have worked.

No, this is me feeling irked by the way content begets success, which begets
*success content*, which gradually but inexorably begins to glorify success and
consumption and extravagance until all of that simply eclipses the reasons we
started creating things in the first place.

Peter's video is a ridiculously well-produced, cinematic spectacle of a rich
kid's trip to a high-end boutique to buy an indulgence on a lark, masquerading
as a how-to video for the creatively bored.

It's an altar to the success of the YouTube platform and Peter's reach as a
creator, and an entirely too-distracting way of saying "try something
different."

It only flies because it's a personal narrative, a glimpse into Peter's own
life and his own choices, and to those he has an inalienable right. But the
paper-thin sheen of "wow maybe try something new sometimes!" which comes across
as *advice* feels less genuine, less grounded, at least to me.

## Creativity Is Always Free

If you want to break out of a "rut" in your work, a solution is always available
for nothing. Only take photos laying down. Only take photos at a single focal
length that you already own. Only take photos in portrait orientation.

But if you *want* to buy something, consider carefully why you want it.

Someone called "Jim Powers" left this comment on Peter's video:

> The more you pay for a camera, the better the images look to you. I’ve owned
> Leicas and Hasselblads, but images hanging on the wall were indistinguishable
> from my Nikons or Mamiyas. Never stopped me from trying to buy talent,
> though. The magic dust isn’t in the camera.

That's a little smarmy for sure, but with few exceptions, equipment doesn't
guarantee any result. All a Fuji GFX 100S guarantees is that there are 100
million pixels in the image. The photo could still be crap. You could still feel
uninspired while using it.

You can absolutely [learn photography with your smartphone][phone]. You can buy
superb vintage glass on eBay for [less than $100][ebay]. You can even [rent a
Leica Q2 for a week][rent] for under $300.

[phone]: {{< ref "can-you-learn-photography-with-a-smartphone-" >}}
[ebay]: https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_nkw=canon+fd+50mm&_sacat=0&_udhi=100&_sop=12
[rent]: https://www.lensrentals.com/rent/leica-q2

You want to get weird with it? Try one of these [Lensbaby Composer Pro II][lb]
lenses for around $225. I had a previous iteration of the Composer Pro for Canon
mount and had a ton of fun with it.

[lb]: https://lensbaby.com/collections/collection/products/composer-pro-ii-sweet-50-refurbished

Phil Hansen [did a TED talk][ted] about suffering nerve damage in high school,
which caused his hand to shake uncontrollably. He dropped out of art school and
gave up art for years. Eventually, he returned, and his physical limitation
pushed him to try things he never would have tried before.

[ted]: https://www.ted.com/talks/phil_hansen_embrace_the_shake

In the talk, he says:

> Sometimes you need to be limited in order to become limitless.

Maybe that limit, for you, is a $6,000 Leica Q2 Reporter Edition, and if so,
that's wonderful. Just remember that limitations come in many forms and with
many prices, and all of them provide the same tension and challenge that great
art is born from.

Now go make something.
